## RAID
We have one disk, but as with many things in computer science, more might be better. Can we use multiple disks to improve the **capacity**, **performance**, and **reliability** of the system?
For the Operating System, the disk is abstracting to a linear array. This means that multiple disks can be set up to extend the linear array without any extra work on the OS's side. This is a redundant array of independent disks (RAID) system. 
A RAID system includes its own RAID controller, a physically separate device, typically connected via SATA or PCIe. 

So, we have an array of disks. How do we map blocks in the linear array to disks in the RAID? We'll denote the number of disks as $N$ and the capacity in gigabytes as $D$. The random performance of the disk is $R$ and the sequential is $S$. There are a few options:
1. **RAID 0**: "striping". We distribute the blocks evenly. Disk 1 gets the first block, disk 2 gets the second, disk 3 gets the third, etc. This loops around when we run out of disks. If there's three disks, the fourth block goes to disk 1. This capacity is $N\times D$, and read/write performance are both $R$ time. The **throughput**, or stream of requests, for random requests is $N\times R$, while the sequential throughput is $N\times S$. Finally, this system is *not* reliable. If one disk fails, we lose all disks. In fact, since we have multiple disks rather than one, RAID 0 has less reliability than a single disk. The **mean time to failure (MTTF)** is 3 years. These are independent and can be summed; if there are 10 disks, after one year, there's a $\frac{10}{3}$ chance of failure. 
2. **RAID 1** (sometimes called RAID10). We use RAID 0, but we duplicate data. With four disks, the first block goes to both disks 1 and 2, the second block goes to 3 and 4, the third goes to 1 and 2, etc. The capacity is $D\times \frac{N}{2}$. Reliability is much better. We can tolerate at least one failure. The MTTF is 3000 years. The latency performance is $R$ for read and writes, and the throughput is for random reads is $N\times R$. This is twice as good as RAID 0 because the data is duplicated once. The throughput for random writes is $\frac{N\times R}{2}$. 